༄༅། ། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྱུར་སོབ་གྲྭའི་སོབ་ཚན། །
LRZTP 9 Module 1 – Lesson 6, June 2023
གཟའ་ཉི་མ་ལ་ ཁོང་ཚོས་
རང་སྦྱོང་ བྱས་
མ་སོང་ངས།
on Sunday they + a.p. self-study to do (past) aux. (past negative question)
Didn’t they do self-study on Sunday?
ཁོང་ཚོས་
རང་སྦྱོང་
བྱས་
མ་སོང་།
they + a.p. self-study to do (past) aux. (negation)
They did not do (any).
And remember: When there is a question word, no question particle is required:
ཁེད་རང་གིས་ སྐོར་ར་
ག་ཚོད་
བརྒྱབ་
པ་ཡིན།
you + a.p.
kora
how many to do (past) aux. (past)
How many koras did you do?
Additionally, you have to keep in mind the issue about volition: not every question starting
with ཁེད་རང་ will have auxiliaries pertaining to བདག.
But again, you’ve already been asked this question many times throughout the past weeks:
ཚིག་འདི་ཁེད་རང་གིས་མཁེན་སོང་ངས།
ལགས་ཧ་གོ་སོང་། ངས་ཚིག་འདི་ཧ་གོ་སོང་།
Did you understand this word? (H)
Yes, I did understand this word.
Questions About Yourself
And, last but not least, as it is a beautiful summary of the logic of the Tibetan བདག་གཞན་
system and how it works with the auxiliaries: If you ask a question about yourself in the past,
which auxiliary do you use?
As we saw in Lesson 4, questions about oneself require auxiliaries pertaining to གཞན.
Now, as for the evidence: Since you will ask your question to somebody whom you think
will know the answer from his/her own experience, it will be:
ཁ་སང་
འཛིན་གྲྭའི་ནང་ལ་
ངས་
ག་རེ་
ལབ་ སོང་།
yesterday in class
I + a.p. what say aux. (past)
What did I say in class yesterday?
Full Verbs
Even though it might not appear to be the case after the introduction to this lesson - the good
news is: to use past tense in Tibetan is easier than in English, as there are comparatively very
few past tense forms to familiarize yourself with. Unlike in English, many – if not most –
verb forms remain the same when used in the past tense.
However, a small number of them do change. The little table below summarizes some of
the most common changes which are: a) The present/future form has an “o” sound and the
18

