༄༅། ། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྱུར་སོབ་གྲྭའི་སོབ་ཚན། །
LRZTP 9 Module 1 – Lesson 6, June 2023
So, if you only know that somebody went to the temple, but you did not see it yourself,
you’d say:
ཁ་སང་
བཀྲ་ཤིས་
ལ་ཁང་ལ་
ཕིན་
པ་རེད།
yesterday Tashi
to the temple to go (past) auxiliary (past, inf.)
Yesterday, Tashi went to the temple.
However, if you saw him taking pictures there, you’d say:
ཁ་སང་
བཀྲ་ཤིས་ཀིས་ ལ་ཁང་ལ་
པར་བརྒྱབ་
སོང་།
yesterday Tashi + a.p. at the temple take picture (past) aux. (past direct)
Yesterday, Tashi took pictures at the temple.
ཐ་དད་པ་ and ཐ་མི་དད་པ་ and the བྱེད་ས་ Agentive Particle
So, technically speaking, the third thing you always decide in your mind about the verb is
whether it is ཐ་དད་པ་ or ཐ་མི་དད་པ་.
According to the Tibetan way of thinking, since the past is not within reach of one's actual
eyesight, agent and object are more easily mixed up. Therefore, in the past tense one uses the
agentive marker བྱེད་ས་ with ཐ་དད་པ་ verbs – where agent and object are distinct from one
another.
To be able to fully distinguish every single verb as being one of the two is a higher
philosophy that not even all native speakers would agree upon. At your beginner stage,
therefore, this is nothing you should be concerned about.
Remember: Most verbs are ཐ་དད་པ་, the most common ཐ་མི་དད་པ་ ones are motion verbs: འགོ་
བ་ (to go), སྡོད་པ་ (to stay, live), ཕེབས་པ་ (to come, go (H)), etc. and all བྱེད་མེད་ལས་ཚིག (nonvolitional) verbs are ཐ་མི་དད་པ་.
Since the agentive particle is attached to the pronoun, if the context is clear, but you are not
sure about the verb being ཐ་དད་པ་ or ཐ་མི་དད་པ་, just leave out the pronoun! Some people
might consider this to not be completely correct, but it is very common in colloquial speech.
སོན་མ་
བོད་སྐད་
ཏོག་ཙམ་
སྦྱངས་
པ་ཡིན།
in the past Tibetan language a bit to learn
aux. (past, vol.)
In the past, [I] learned a little bit of Tibetan.
The full and correct sentence would start with a: ངས་ (ང་ + བྱེད་ས་) because the verb is ཐ་
དད་པ་.
Negation

15

