༄༅། ། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྱུར་སོབ་གྲྭའི་སོབ་ཚན། །
LRZTP 9 Module 1 – Lesson 5, May-June 2023
Present Tense, with Special Emphasis: ཐ་དད་པ་ Verb:
བསན་པ་ལགས་ཀིས་
ཤ་
ཟ་
Tenpa la + བེད་ས་
meat
eat
Tenpa la does not eat meat.

གི་ཡོད་མ་རེད།
(present aux., Lesson 7)

Or: As for Tenpa la, he does not eat meat.
Additional Subtlety:
The Concept of འཁྲུལ་གཞི་ Basis of Confusion
As explained above, the function of the བེད་ས་ is to mark the agent of an action. In addition to the two rules given above,
the བེད་ས་ must be applied in a case of འཁྲུལ་གཞི་– basis of confusion – meaning any sentence with potential confusion as
to who is the agent and who is the object.
For example:
བོ་བཟང་
གསད་
ཀི་རེད།
Lobsang
kill
(future auxiliary)
Since there is no བེད་ས་, Lobsang could be either the agent of the verb or its object.
Here, therefore, there are two possible translations:
(Somebody) will kill Lobsang.
Lobsang will kill (something).
This is a འཁྲུལ་གཞི་, a basis of confusion.
Therefore, in order to avoid confusion, even though the sentence is in the future tense, you need to add the བེད་ས་:
བོ་བཟང་ གིས་
གསད་
ཀི་རེད།
Lobsang བེད་ས་
kill
(future auxiliary)
Lobsang will kill (something).
Another classic case of འཁྲུལ་གཞི་is the following:
ང་
ཁེད་རང་ མཐོང་
སོང་།
I
you see/s
past auxiliary
In this sentence it is not clear who sees whom.
Although the sentence structure might suggest that “I” is the one who sees and “you” is the object being seen, there is
no guarantee that this is the meaning.
In Tibetan, therefore, it is indispensable to mark the agent with a བེད་ས་:
ངས་
ཁེད་རང་ མཐོང་
སོང་།
I + བེད་ས་
you see/saw
(past auxiliary)
I saw you.
A common mistake among Westerners is to think that མཐོང་བ་ needs a བེད་ས་ because it is a བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ verb (since
the verb to see is transitive in English.)
However, this is not the case. The verb མཐོང་བ་ is བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་ and the བེད་ས་ is needed in order to clarify who is the
agent and who is the object.

The Main and Subsidiary Agents བེད་པ་པོ་གཙོ་བོ་དང་བེད་པ་པོ་ཕལ་བ།
Another peculiarity of Tibetan is that the བེད་ས་ is also sometimes used to mark the instrument or means by which the
action of the verb is done. In such a sentence, there are two agents – the main agent བེད་པ་པོ་གཙོ་བོ་ and the subsidiary
23

