༄༅། ། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྱུར་སོབ་གྲྭའི་སོབ་ཚན། །
LRZTP 9 Module 1 – Lesson 5, May-June 2023
བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་དང་། བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ།
All Tibetan verbs may be classified within two categories, namely བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ and བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་. It is a common mistake
to equate these with transitive and intransitive verbs in English. Although in most cases བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ verbs are transitive and
བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་ verbs are intransitive, the concepts behind the classifications differ.
In English, the definition of a transitive verb is that it has a direct (accusative) object.
In Tibetan, a verb is བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ (lit. separate) when the agent - who is endowed with volition - and the action are separate
from each other.
For example: ཟ་བ་, the verb “to eat”, is བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ because the agent and the object being eaten are two different entities. In
the case of this verb, the definitions overlap because in English, likewise, the verb “to eat” is transitive:
English: I eat an apple
“I” is the subject; “apple” is the direct (accusative) object.
Tibetan: ང་ཀུ་ཤུ་ཟ་གི་ཡོད།
ང་ is the agent (བེད་པ་པོ་); ཀུ་ཤུ་ is the object (ཡུལ་)
However, since there are a few interesting cases where the two definitions do not overlap, it is important to become familiar
with the Tibetan concept of བ་བེད་ཐ་དད་པ་ and བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་. Understanding this is crucial to choosing the correct auxiliary.

The verb “to get, obtain, receive” in English is transitive. However, its Tibetan translation རག་པ་ is བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་and the
sentence structure and auxiliary are therefore different. According to the Tibetan understanding, the action of getting happens to
the person and is therefore not separate. The verb “to get” is therefore བ་བེད་ཐ་མི་དད་པ་.
For example:
ང་
ལ་
me
to
I get work.

ལས་ཀ་
work

རག་
get

གི་འདུག
(pres. auxiliary)

This nuance is clearly indicated by the usage of the particle ལ་. This particular particle shows that the action of “getting”
happens to me. The “I” is the recipient of the action, or the place upon which the action happens.
Another case where the classifications differ between English and Tibetan is with verbs such as ཤེས་པ་ “to know,” མཐོང་བ་ “to
see,” and གོ་བ་ “to hear.” In English these are transitive verbs, but according to the Tibetan definition they are ཐ་མི་དད་པ།.
As explained above, this is the case because from the Tibetan perspective, there is no agent endowed with volition involved.
The “knowing,” “seeing” and “hearing” are the result of “watching,” “listening” and “studying” respectively.
For example:
ངས་
by me
I see the cat.

ཞི་མི་དེ་
the cat

མཐོང་
is

གི་འདུག
seen.

19

