༄༅། ། ལོ་ཙཱ་བ་རིན་ཆེན་བཟང་པོའི་སྐད་སྒྱུར་སོབ་གྲྭའི་སོབ་ཚན། །
LRZTP 9 Module 1 – Lesson 8, June 2023
Near or Far Future
Modern English translations for the future tense can vary. It is equally common to see/hear: “I
will do X” and “I'm going to do X.” It will be clear from the context which of these is applicable.
ཁེད་རང་གཟའ་སེན་པ་ལ་ག་རེ་གནང་གི་ཡིན།
What are you going to do on Saturday? (H) or: What will you do on Saturday?
ད་ལྟ་ངས་ཧ་གོ་མ་སོང་། ལྟ་གིན་ལྟ་གིན་བྱེད་ཀི་ཡིན།
I do not know now. I’m going to play it by ear. or: I’ll play it by ear.
སང་ཉིན་ཁོང་ཚོ་ཁེད་རང་དང་མཉམ་དུ་འགེམས་སྟོན་ཁང་ལ་ཕེབས་ཀི་རེད་པས།
Will they go to the museum with you tomorrow? (H) or: Are they going to go to the
museum with you tomorrow? (H)
ལགས་ཕེབས་ཀི་མ་རེད། ཡིན་ནའི་དེའི་རེས་ལ་ཁོང་རམ་ཚོ་ངའི་སེ་སྐར་ཐུགས་སྤྲོ་ལ་ཕེབས་ཀི་རེད།
No, they will not go. But after that they will come to my birthday party. (H)
The Use of the བྱེད་སྒྲ་ in the Future
As the above examples illustrate, there is no need to use the བྱེད་སྒྲ་ agentive marker in the
future tense. It is only used in the case of a འཁྲུལ་གཞི་, a possible source of confusion, or in
order to give extra emphasis to the agent of the verb. The latter is often combined with the
particular verbs used to indicate that you volunteer for somebody, which will be introduced a
bit later in this lesson. For example:
ངས་ཞབས་ཞུ་མ་སྐད་གཏང་གི་ཡིན།
I will call over the waitress. (emphasis)
སང་ཉིན་དགོང་དག་ངས་ཁ་ལག་བཟོ་གི་ཡིན།
Tomorrow evening, I will cook. (emphasis)
བློ་བཟང་གིས་ཁེད་རང་མཐོང་གི་རེད།
Lobsang will see you. (clears confusion about agent and object)
Short Way to Ask Questions
Abbreviated Auxiliaries
You may have observed that many Tibetans like to shorten the sentences. In the case of བདག་
related questions it is, therefore, extremely common not to use the actual auxiliaries གི་ཡིན། or
གི་ཡིན་པས།. They are replace by a simple ག or གས། respectively. So, remember, when there is a
question-word, then ག applies, and in a sentence with no question-word, གས། will turn it into
a question. For example:
21
©2023 LRZTP

